hello everyone and welcome to an
interview that I'm doing no video this
mistake is we weren't able to figure it
out but my name is Travis cafard if you
have not familiar with my work I mostly
interview in the League of Legends space
mostly around eSports but general
eSports audience and stuff that's kind
of my my audience but I am joined right
now by Morgan Roman so I get everybody
remind oh so close we just talked about
that before the start of this or again
maybe it's best if you help introduce
yourself and provide some context for
your background sure so I have been in
gaming for a long time and in eSports
for since before it was even called
eSports I started off with Ubisoft back
in the day helped found the all-women's
professional gaming team the frag dolls
went on to be an eSports director for an
independent studio based out of Orange
County and then through that works with
a bunch of other people and the eSports
side of things like ESL and then got my
PhD in cultural anthropology where I was
actually studying like local game
development culture and all of that has
sort of culminated in my current role as
the director of initiatives for any key
which is an advocacy group in gaming
where we advocate for diversity and
inclusion in eSports very good well I
want to thank you for sitting down with
me or for having this call I know we
were trying to figure out interviews and
stuff in and generally speaking of you
know for my audience I know there's been
a lot of people who have been asking me
to chime in on the conversation or and
all the stuff that has come out from
write games in the past month or so and
I wanted to figure out a way to be very
thoughtful about it a good approach and
not just be me so we're talking about it
so I think Morgan I would say that you
qualify as an expert in this field given
all your experience both you know at
from a pregnant pragmatics point of view
but also academically so superheavy talk
to you yeah absolutely happy to be here
and as you know like as a PhD and an
educator I like to try to help
illuminate things that can be murky and
social media these days make things
really murky
so hopefully your conversation can can
can help to do to help ya and hopefully
this is unique because there are a lot
of social media posts about this topic
and so hopefully hopefully more than 280
characters will assist so before we get
into it you know the one thing I do want
to address is that you know I go into my
YouTube demographics and 95% of the
people who watch my videos tend to be
male what I think there's probably a lot
of people that are listening this right
now and they're saying like oh I'm gonna
listen to a woman talk about all the
stuff she's gonna come out and say all
this the stuff that like I don't want to
hear or I'm frustrated with it what
would you say to anybody who's like
interesting and turning this off or
maybe not listening to it at all well if
you love riot and you've been paying
attention so far then you may be pretty
frustrated with the dialogue and how it
sort of progressed so I think this is an
opportunity to maybe clarify some of the
points where like some people are just
yelling at each other and not really
finding a middle ground I think I think
it's important when you love something
and you care about it a lot and you're
invested in it to understand why I like
hey right it's probably gonna be making
some changes why are they doing that so
even if you ultimately don't agree with
the decisions or you don't really think
it's important or whatever to have some
background on the changes that they're
making might might make it seem less
frustrating in the future cool all right
well maybe we can just start off with
the the Kotaku piece that came out that
sort of started this conversation a
while back obviously just a ton of stuff
that's in there I think if anybody
hasn't read it yet they should certainly
has a lot of value to you know it
provides a lot of context for what this
conversation is but I'd love to get your
take whenever you saw that that article
came out you know and you read through
what was your response and kind of
thoughts on all this stuff so my initial
reaction was the opposite of surprised
because this is really what the patterns
that they describe and the practices are
pretty common honestly I mean it happens
to be riot who's you know sort of on
deck to face the reality of these
practices that they've
baked into their culture first but there
are plenty of other Studios that do very
similar things so that was not
surprising to me I mean I've I've worked
in environments where I have seen and
been subject to very similar practices
and you know like I also know a lot of
women in the game industry who who will
tell stories like this like it's just a
natural part of the job which for many
of us it kind of is which is sad but
also the fact that we're able to sort of
we have journalists who are bringing
this stuff to the surface helps us to
admit like oh yeah that that really
actually does suck and seriously impacts
my my work experience so I wasn't
surprised to summarize it yeah there
since then there's been several other
pieces that have come out statements
from former writers current writers sort
of describing their experiences at the
company you know one of the things that
struck me was that the article described
a lot of behavior that was picked up in
in very different ways by the audience
so you know like there's a story about
somebody who would go into meetings if
there weren't women there and they'd
just like fart in front of somebody and
that that became almost like a meme in
the community yes specifically and
that's become a meme in the community
but then there are also stories where
you know like I think it leads with
somebody who wanted to hire a female
member to their team and a lot of people
sort of frustrated by the idea that they
would specifically target a woman to add
to the team rather than looking for for
somebody who in their mind which is a
better approach would just be to say hey
we want to hire whoever is most
qualified if it's a woman that's great
and then and then even stories that are
more specific just about how very like
personal stories about the the
interactions between a female member of
riot and a male member so there's a lot
of like different types of conversation
that are going on in that article I
don't know if you want to you know share
your thoughts on on any of those
different types or kind of the reaction
that you've seen from the community on
that or how the stuff unfolds across so
many different ways sure well okay I
mean it's that
pretty general prompt there but I think
there's a lot to dig into and and maybe
just to kind of set the ground rules
maybe from the beginning because I'm
making certain assumptions that I want
the listeners to know that I'm making
certain assumptions and one of them is
that diversity is a good thing because
if we if we don't agree that diversity
is a good thing then you know then we're
not gonna get very far in this
discussion anyway but diversity has been
shown there have been many studies that
have shown that in creative environments
diversity is a helpful thing for having
a wealth of ideas and perspectives to
pull from it's also advantageous when
you have teams that are working on
solving problems when you have diversity
you have a greater array of potential
solutions that come to the fore and so
actually actively looking for diverse
perspectives is is a beneficial thing
you know in a work environment and
certainly in a gaming game development
environment so that's that's like the
first assumption I would say that we're
going to work from the next thing is
that one of the sort of underlying
issues that will come up a lot when
we're talking about game development
culture and some the practices we see in
riot especially pertaining to how people
are promoted and and hired and like
rewarded within the company is this idea
of meritocracy and the idea that like
well if you're better then you will rise
to the top and you will succeed
but when you start to actually unpack
what that looks like there is there's
just a ton of subjective opinions that
are informing what people think of as as
successful or somebody who's doing a
good job is dependent on a lot of
subjective judgements and and also
dependent on two things like your
communication style so at riot they
really encourage you to be very vocal
and very sort of aggressive with your
ideas and they feel like if your idea is
worthwhile then it will get picked up
but if you are a let's say five foot
four woman
high voice it becomes really a lot more
difficult for you to be aggressive and
forceful with your ideas in a meeting
which can then end up with your ideas
not being taken seriously we saw a
couple examples of that in in the Kotaku
article so I would just sort of
underlying that meritocracy has some
flaws because we're not all working from
a purely objective sort of framework
like there's a lot of subjectivity that
goes into that and when you have values
that tend to favor guys then all the
women in that environment are at a
disadvantage and it's not because their
ideas suck or because they're not
working as hard or whatever so the
meritocracy thing will be a problem that
will continue to come back to and then I
think the other ground rule we're
talking about women who are coming
forward with stories of harassment you
know there there's a lot of sort of meta
talk that comes out of this these these
topics about about her basically anytime
a woman steps forward to to report
harassment she's instantly being
questioned about whether or not it's
valid or well it whether or not she what
actually happened or maybe she
encouraged or maybe she interpreted
wrong or whatever what we tend to do in
in supportive and advocacy groups is we
believe what people say so a reporting a
first-hand experience to say this
happened to me and it made me feel this
way
then you believe them and then you work
from there so that's the other ground
rule that I'll be working sure sounds
good and and I think that helps provide
a lot of context for this just on the
meritocracy thing I think there will
probably be some people who react and
say well like what are you suggesting we
don't promote people off of meritocracy
because you you end up in a situation
where you know somebody could claim like
hey this person has worked way harder or
pitts way more effort in if we are not
allowed to promote people based off
their merit what is the point in trying
harder why not reward people who are
trying harder or trying to accomplish
more or have have found more success in
their role yeah I know absolutely I mean
I think that we all ultimately would
really love to have
this pure meritocratic system where we
could all say like hey if we put in X
number of hours then that's going to you
know get us you know guarantee that we
are at least recognized for the hours
that we've put in and then the quality
of our work we measured along views like
predictable sort of meters and it's just
it's not that easy so what I would say
is that companies when they're trying to
do assessments of their employees
success and the quality of their work
they just really need to be self
reflective about how they're measuring
that and where they're leaving gaps for
subjective judgment and how they can can
sort of temper the inequities that can
come from that I mean I think that's why
having an HR department is actually
really helpful if you have a good one if
you have a good HR department that their
job is to constantly be figuring out how
to to judge that in a fair way and you
know certainly the values of the company
are set by the the people who are in
charge and the leadership team so they
have to work really really closely with
their HR departments to figure out like
how can our values be represented in
these sort of measurement systems and
how we make sure that it's fair you
can't just take for granted that like oh
this this guy totally embodies all of
our values and without recognizing like
hey maybe he just happens to be set up
for that whereas this woman has been
doing great work but she doesn't fill
that one value whatever that is so mate
how can we change our our sort of
assessment to be able to account for
that
it but it is absolutely and admittedly
it's a difficult thing and that's why
you have whole departments whose jobs
are supposed to be bad yeah I think you
were right and suggesting that my my
question to start this office a little
widespread I'll go a little bit more I
guess on a personal level I for a long
time have been very aware that right had
the strong cultural idea of we hire
gamers and usually I think for a while
at least this might have changed
recently that that was core gamers right
because they felt they wanted to make
games that were targeted towards core
core game
like the the World of Warcraft's a Call
of Duty's the League of Legends the dota
is the csgo etc and and for me you know
especially until I read this article I
never really questioned that in fact I
thought it was a great idea right
because if you are making a product for
an audience why not hire people who are
intimately aware with that audience
because they are part of it themselves
they should be best suited to make that
type of game or that type of product but
it seems like perhaps there are some
unfortunate side effects and following
that cultural idea sorry I don't know if
you can hear the animal barking outside
my apartment but either way I it sounds
like there's some unfortunate side
effects that come along with it I don't
know if you have any thoughts on well
yeah I mean you probably have never had
your game or credibility questioned or
at least not consistently and my skill
set okay
people should question it if I'm good or
not and normally the answer is I'm bad
but no nobody you're right that nobody
ever says well maybe you're not really a
gamer yeah like no like maybe you're
just doing it because it's popular now
which is of course a very very silly
when you start to break that down like
why suddenly because it's popular so
therefore like there are other popular
things why why would women suddenly
flock to this just because it's become
popular now it's because they actually
like games and probably been playing
them for a while but I mean women are
constantly subject to gatekeeping
practices where they get quizzed about
like yeah well what games did you play
and how long have you been playing and
and how far did you get in this and this
and what's your rank and blah blah blah
and that was detailed in the Kotaku
article as well where women who are
interviewing we're talking about how it
was like their credibility was being
questioned at every stage and they had
to prove that they were a core gamer but
then that questioning continued and and
I I will save from I have personal
experience coming from a professional
gaming team and still entering
environments where people are
disbelieving that purely because I'm a
woman that therefore I am not genuinely
invested in games and don't actually
love them and probably I'm lying about
some
I don't know like it's it's just it's
weird and can really become exhausting
when you're like no I'm I'm here because
I love it and I think games are rad and
that you have people who are like no no
you have some ulterior motive I don't
know what it is well so I I did I film
this play maker series where I
interviewed and profiled a much
different people at riot I filmed it
directly before all the stuff came out
which was an interesting time to release
it but I I will admit that in the series
I tried to interview you know I tried to
ask the question to everyone I
interviewed you know what games have you
played what if you don't because it's a
great way oftentimes for the audience to
connect but in the back of my mind while
I'm interviewing you know the women that
appeared in this series you know I have
no doubt that they are gamers it's not
something that I I questioned but I know
that it's actually it in my mind I've
thought oh it's important for me to make
sure they get these questions in because
you know otherwise YouTube comments will
flood it and say like well are these
people really like it helps add to their
credibility whenever they say like oh I
loved playing World of Warcraft where I
loved playing this like RPG game or
whatever yeah well and if you have
somebody who's only been playing for a
year you know would that people are like
why is that and it's like maybe I do
only just discovered it but that doesn't
it shouldn't mean that they're any less
welcome or less qualified to be there I
mean if we're talking about you know a
game development company you could have
somebody who would be an extremely
talented artist who maybe only is played
you know world Warcraft maybe they loved
world Warcraft but that maybe is the
only game that they've played but if she
happens to be a woman that might not cut
it it might be like well sorry you don't
have enough experience with games like
if she's a talented enough artist and
she's got the style that you want you
would hope that that would that would
qualify them I mean you know again
there's a lot of subjective stuff that
goes into hiring hiring is really a
complex thing but that idea of hiring
gamers is fraught because there is sort
of baked into that idea of what a gamer
is stereotypically women are at a
disadvantage so do you think it would be
wise for riot to change their policy
away from saying we only hire gamers
should they start to hire people who
don't necessarily have a gaming
I mean I I feel like that's probably so
central to who riot is I can't I can't
imagine them doing that I can't foresee
them doing you know making a huge change
to their values that way but I would say
that perhaps refining what they mean by
that is it would be the most sort of
helpful step and being aware of how how
this idea of the core gamer can can
discriminate I mean you know the other
thing they're trying to make another
game right like they can't live with
right so they they they need to
diversify their portfolio anyway I think
that they've they would actually benefit
from maybe casting a wider net and being
open to looking at people with a more
diverse background I mean certainly like
you want people to in gaming gaming is a
as a passion industry you want people to
love the product that they're working on
and I mean to be real people get paid
less than the game industry so for most
part if people are applying for game
industry jobs instead of just going
straight to you know Silicon Valley tech
it's because they like games like
they're they're here because they're
passionate about it but that's that I
think is probably central to the Riot
culture to the point where even if
somebody didn't love games and didn't
love the games that riot was making they
probably wouldn't have a great
experience the company anyway a fuck
just wouldn't think it was so great so
that part I wouldn't say they have to
change that necessarily but thinking of
ways to cast a wider net would not only
be beneficial for the company but
beneficial for the the people
potentially being hired yeah kind of
what you know what do you think of just
the idea of how widespread all these
issues are within the company because I
struggled with this not that I could I
didn't believe it in fact it was very
believable to me an instructor me as I
was thinking about how their culture is
and sort of the cultural values how
those could values could sort of occur
but for me a lot of the stuff as
somebody whose fault it for a long time
I I was surprised because i i've met
women there who you know seemed seem to
get promoted seems to not face these
issues in conversations with them and
and certainly we saw people come out on
twitter say that they they hadn't had
these issues before then we saw a whole
lot of other people who had and so I
think for the audience for myself but
also just for like the general audience
on reddit or Twitter or elsewhere it's
like wait so as where I just filled with
all these sexist people is it just does
it suck to be a woman there or or is
this something smaller in which case do
you do you consider it less important
because it's like isolated of certain
areas of the company that can be cleaned
up I I think a lot of people have had a
hard time sort of figuring out how to
tackle that idea sure so I mean riot is
a very large company and I you know so I
think that acknowledging that people can
have very different experiences
dependent upon which department they're
in because I have a a friend who's a
woman who works at riot and has you know
has said that she has not personally had
these experiences however she has
witnessed a lot of these these sort of
toxic cultural behaviors and you know
she says that she's she's in a great
group and she feels like she's pretty
lucky and that's part of the reason why
she hasn't had negative experiences but
I mean I think that the way to relate to
this is like look at all of us men and
women have had an experience with a
bully at some point probably or somebody
who is a jerk to you and it can be
isolated and isolating and and it's very
possible that your best friend never had
that toxic experience with that person
so like you know I think that that the
worst the worst experiences are usually
exacerbated by an individual but the
cultural problems that riot that are
more pervasive are that they encourage
certain bad behaviors that can then lead
to sort of these these patterns that can
that can become really toxic when when
sort of taken up by the wrong person if
that makes sense like if you have
individuals that concentrate the one
who's farting on people like you're but
that's one person right but like he's
able to
that because there is a culture at riot
of dominance this sort of toxic
masculinity dominance an aggressive
behavior where it's like if you if you
bulk at my farting on your face then
you're a wimp and therefore I have just
dominated you and I've won and your
opinions are therefore lesser and that
impacts both men and women in the
culture but the company itself is not
encouraging people to fart on people but
the company is enabling that behavior by
allowing sort of this free rein of
aggression and not letting people not
kind of telling people like hey we all
have different communication styles and
maybe you like talking over people is is
actually not okay like we need to give
an opportunity for other people to talk
and to listen for example like like we
we can take the gender aspect out of
that and and make it more relatable to
people but however I will again come
back to the fact that women when we're
talking about some of these these
negative patterns women are you know ten
times more likely to encounter them and
to be sort of shut down and have their
ideas dismissed by them when you have
these sort of toxic masculinity sort of
practices that come out and by the way I
do want to clarify because toxic
masculinity is a phrase that I know gets
really lots of people riled up but
partly because it's mostly because they
don't understand what we're referring to
I actually had this discussion with my
dad because he got really defensive
about it toxic masculinity does not mean
that masculinity in itself is toxic it
means that there is a certain brand of
masculinity that sort of extracts
certain things that you might associate
with masculinity like like dominance and
aggression and and takes those and makes
those aspects toxic and abusive so I
don't want to be on the record as saying
that you know masculinity itself is
toxic because nah but this is a certain
brand of type of masculinity that
sometimes like you sometimes see in
traditional sports environments where
you hear about like bullies on NFL teams
who hear like basically beat down
everybody any of the rookies and do
horrible things to them until those
rookies have to finally stand up for
themselves like that's that's the type
of thing that we're talking about I
think
riot has some some patterns of behavior
that tend to emerge because of their
values of like speaking up and and being
transparent and if you have a problem
with some decision that somebody made
then you go directly to them and you and
you talk to them about it and you
confront them which you know on paper
that sounds like I'd be a really healthy
communication environment but when you
actually unpack it it starts to become
problematic which again that's that's
where I go to like you when you when you
reflect on how that could be problematic
for some people that's where you can
start to make change that it will be
beneficial for a more diverse workforce
speaking of of that sort of reflection
on on individuals and sort of like the
systemic issues that occur there was a
account that came out recently by a
former writer a man who had an
interaction with mark and Brandon the
cofounders of the company no longer
leading the day-to-day of the company
but where I guess this was maybe I think
in 2013 was the account brandy 14 I
think Brandon had made a hiring summit
of summit on hiring a a rape joke about
how no doesn't mean no and that that
joke was then sort of put into a
document and that there's a conversation
that occurred between this male right
employee and some folks on his team he
went and brought these two these issues
to mark and Brandon and and there was
almost kind of at least from his
description a an attempt to reorganize
his thoughts on it or explain why this
is acceptable or why you know these
types of jokes need to exist within riot
culture because otherwise riot you know
it loses this identity in some sense
what was your your personal opinion on
all that stuff as you were reading
through that so again not surprised
although it was really interesting to
kind of see him talk about a very
specific instance
of what it could look like inside riot
or a similar game development company
when somebody steps forward and speaks
out about the behavior of leadership and
questions leadership and sort of what
what transpired after that and how he
you know he sort of stood up for what he
believed in he gave he gave the Brandon
the opportunity to to either apologize
or take it back or or even just be
reflective and be like oh hey I hadn't
thought of it that way
but as you just described it it led to a
meeting with a bunch of other people
where they kind of trying to talk him
out of his his stance and then he stood
by his values and then it seemed like he
said that he could tell if it would
became awkward he could tell that he was
being sort of put on probation because
he was not they were starting to doubt
that he was you know truly invested in
the success of the company and the
values of the company or whatever and so
it really sounded like he he took a huge
hit for standing up and speaking out
which is which is actually a really bad
sign at a company if you can't give
feedback to leadership when you think
that something is wrong and your job is
suddenly jeopardized because you step
forward like that's that is the sign
that something is is not going well and
that you probably like he actually
pointed out also the fact that he was
the only person who had brought up the
how a rape joke during a you know hi
hiring conference on a stage to you know
hundreds of people if nobody else had
brought up that that was a problem or or
chimed in like that's a real sign that
there are people who are afraid to speak
up because they're afraid that their
jobs will be put on the line
so that's that's what stood out to me is
is how I kind of how bad that can be
like you really need to be able to have
a process for being able to give
feedback but also how it seems like a
sort of warping of the values
riot does profess to find important like
they they really do encourage their
employees to confront each other if they
disagree like and that's that's
something that I many of the rioters I
know actually really appreciate that
part of the culture this seems like that
is was not the case in this situation
and I don't know if that's because I
don't know you know I I wasn't there and
I didn't wasn't hearing all the
rationalizations that that were coming
out but I do find find that to be kind
of alarming although again it was I was
in 2014 and I know there's been a
leadership change so hopefully the new
leadership and maybe this is that kind
of pattern helped to contribute to you
the the leadership change for the day to
day stuff but as they say the fish rots
from the head so leadership and that
management team at the very top really
has to own the changes that need to
happen and and own that reevaluation of
like what do our values mean what should
they be and how how is that going to
impact the work experience of the people
here and I I think you know riot has
stepped forward and made statements
about the changes that they're gonna
make and how they're going to reflect so
a little bit cuz I'm super nice to sort
of see what your take is well I I the
one quick question I did want to ask you
before we move on is just with this this
market brand story you know I was
speaking to a friend of mine who who
said that as horrified as he was by the
additional critical article that one
struck home to him because it was so so
specific and that the Kotaku article
often said you know this purse of this
female writer experienced this from a
male writer but knowing you know mark
and Brandon being at the top being such
you know they're lauded in a lot of ways
as visionaries within the industry and I
think within riot there was just a ton
of faith in these individuals you know
well like do you what is your take on
them after this point because it's do
you think a lot of people should lose
faith in him and them as leaders do you
think that you know they it is good that
they step down I mean I think a lot of
people are wondering how should they
view the
two people after this account I I mean
that's that's really that's really
tricky because you know they they have
represented a lot that is good if you're
a gamer and you love League of Legends
like they have helped make that a
wonderful experience for you and you
know they they have stayed very true to
the idea of making a game for gamers
make that they're making it for the
community and they care about what the
community thinks and I and I mean as a
former community manager I that that
speaks to me like I understand that
passion and I understand why why people
believe it that's important I do not
however think that they should be in the
position where they are dictating the
changes that need to happen to the
culture like they they can be
touchstones may be cultural touchstones
for what the culture has been and the
things that are are good that they they
they ultimately as a team as the whole
leadership team decides like what core
values you know really will keep riot
riot and we decide what those things are
they can be part of that team and should
be part of that team
but like by no means should the new
chief diversity and inclusion officer be
reporting to them for example like which
I don't think is the case I think
they're said that it's gonna be
reporting to the new CEO Michael oh yeah
yeah so I mean that's and having some
distance there is good you need to have
some separation where you know somebody
else is the one who's making the
ultimate calls but you know I also think
people can grow and people can change
but they they need to go through this
process where this stuff is being
exposed like I think probably it would
have been a lot easier for Brandon if he
had just in the moment at the time when
he got that email if he'd been like oh
shit like I didn't realize people read
it that way and I'm sorry that I caused
those feelings like that was not my
intention then he wouldn't be dealing
with this right now like that's that is
the thing he probably should have
acknowledged like yeah you're right rape
jokes from the leadership it's too you
know in a professional environment is
wildly inappropriate we can probably
agree with that
like we don't have to debate rape jokes
otherwise like it's really just like in
a professional setting you don't need to
be making rape jokes that's I think that
that's pretty straight yeah I mean that
seems uh I think I think few people
would debate that right like we can
pretty much agree with that and so
that's that's the part that's why that
was a part of the concerned me is
because he was not open to that feedback
so you know as far as people having
their personal heroes sort of brought
down a few notches like that's that's
hard and maybe there needs to be some
time of reckoning and some time of
growth and maybe they they will have the
opportunity to earn that that sort of
love and adoration back and hopefully
they will hopefully they will do the
right thing and support riot and their
current employees the right way to sort
of show that they deserve that that
adoration the future one of the
individuals that was referenced in the
article as a woman named so ha elsa bali
i might be ruining her last name much
like i ruined yours yes i think she's a
diversity inclusion manager who was
hired 18 months ago
yeah something around that time yeah it
the article pressed on on her a little
bit in statements just sort of pointing
out that it seemingly seemingly there
was no change in the diversity ratio
right if that's what you would call it
the 80/20 i think is what they have
right now with with male to female what
what does your general take there cuz it
one that was an interesting moment to me
in the article in that it it was the
first time that there had been or at
least to my knowledge or memory a
discussion around existing diversity
initiatives within the company are
attempts to change and it certainly left
i think a lot of people walking away
from that feeling as though there wasn't
much change happening or that up until
maybe this moment there hadn't been much
change that had occurred with him right
yeah well so first i'll say that the
kind of culture change that we're
talking about takes a long time and it
especially takes a long time if you are
having to have
these conversations with the people who
are in leadership positions
I suspect that Soha spent much of the
past 18 months having these difficult
conversations and trying to explain why
some stuff is not acceptable and not
okay and why why you know where the
opportunities for improvement are and
like she said she didn't have those
conversations and that's a hard job and
it takes a lot of time so I mean I would
say we don't we don't get to see all of
that and I think it's fair actually for
people to have a chance to work through
those conversations behind closed doors
and not be judged for them all the time
like you know you want to give people
space to kind of figure out things
especially things that are difficult and
especially if they're having to kind of
make a 180 on what they maybe previously
believed so I think there's a lot of
work that's been going on behind the
scenes the other thing I would note that
if we're talking specifically about the
the sort of gender proportion or you
know and whether or not that is improved
when we're talking about diversity and
inclusion so first just to clarify that
those those are really two equally
important parts of the equation when
we're talking about like we ultimately
would like to see equity you know gender
equity then diversity inclusion are
equally important diversity refers to
hiring people with a you know a bunch of
different backgrounds and perspectives
the inclusion part however means once
they're there you actually have to
proactively find ways to make sure that
the culture is accepting and welcoming
and inclusive for them because just
hiring them doesn't doesn't do it maybe
that that's not gonna help like you what
ends up happening if you if you just
hire a few women and then throw them
into a cultural environment that
punishes women for speaking out and
punishes them for staying quiet and
punishes them for not being the cool
girl who can tolerate rape jokes like if
you if you put women in that environment
you're just it's basically meat for the
grinder you need to figure out ways to
assess your culture to make it we're
aware and more inclusive
so and I and I actually think we should
probably call it inclusion and diversity
in that order
because that you need to fix some of the
inclusion problems first before you
start feeding a bunch of diversity into
your workforce that makes sense so I
mean I I can only speculate but I would
say that in the ideal situation those
difficult conversations are happening I
think they're trying to figure out like
what what riot should look like in the
future what that can you know what what
that can mean in the day to day
experience in the studio and they're
trying to do that first before really
aggressively going after you know a sort
of diverse hiring strategy and again
that's that's total speculation but I
would say that there's a lot that we're
not able to see and that that's probably
you know giving a company space to
figure that stuff out is is fine they
should should take that time necessary
to do that sure and before we get to
those the statements that Wright has
made sort of following all this I do
want to tackle just the the second or
aftershock controversy or whatever you
want to call it sprung up this past
weekend where we saw a event at PAX West
that was made exclusively towards women
or non-binary during a certain timeframe
of the day after which I think it was
like 230 men were allowed to to attend
so this created a huge eruption over the
course of the weekend not just because
of that but also because of some very
strong statements that individuals that
riot made about the initial reaction to
this write frustration that the
community felt like this was unfair and
and there were some strong words and and
different ways to describe the community
that were made in light of all this
stuff and that that I think further
entrench people and deepened the issue
so first off is it for me I will say I
was not surprised that the community
reacted the way they did when they heard
about heard about this news we were
talking about it a little bit before
this interview because I I think for a
lot of the individuals who heard these
stories from Ryan's there
their take was okay we should have a
quality then right like men and women
should not be treated differently it's
it's terrible that women were treated
differently no one should be treated
differently and and for them they felt
all right well this now you've just
reversed the issue now men are not
allowed into this event that's that's
unfair to to people who might be allies
of the the case or or whatever it for
them that they found that very offensive
so I I don't know if you have a sort of
thought on that yeah I mean so I I have
a lot of experience with with this
particular type of backlash because I
have been in on an all women's team and
I have participated in organizing all
women's csgo leagues and this is this is
the backlash that happens all the time
and you know I like I I will say that I
certainly applaud the notion that
equality is best like that's I agree
with that and I think we all probably
can agree like let's let's get to that
point that is where we are trying to go
in the future and like we're talking
about eSports competitions for example
ultimately we would love to see women on
those final stages and see men and women
playing together and seeing equity in
that environment in that culture and in
the game development environment where
actually I think that they're they're
doing better than the elite tiers of
eSports we would love to see a lot more
women participating in game development
and you know feeling welcome in game
development like we I think we can agree
that getting there however is difficult
and it is not something that we cannot
get there just by passively waiting for
it to happen I was speaking from
experience like when I was you know with
the fire doll team we started in 2004
and it felt like for a while there was
progress being made but then but then it
also felt like we back slid in the in
the last sort of five years in terms of
visibility of women in gaming and
eSports so we it you need to take
proactive measures to be able to support
the women who are currently in the space
and then also find ways to invite more
women in and one of the ways to do that
is to create new all-women's spaces and
and I think it's important to identify
that we're not suggesting that we create
whole companies that are all women or
like a whole like alternative universe
of that is only women we're adding to
the existing the existing ecosystem so
like those those people who feel like oh
god they're taking something away from
me like they're taking this space away
they're taking away access to riot by
making this panel room women only or
whatever like we're trying to add to the
experiences that are available not
trying to take anything away from
anybody and that's that's also the way
with it works with all women's
tournaments like we create alternative
women's tournaments we're not trying to
match the main event because ultimately
we want women to be playing in the main
event tournaments but providing them a
space to play with our all women's teams
helps them to sort of rice the top as
role models we get better visibility
because we're like oh yeah they're all
these women are playing over here and
look some of them are really really good
which is harder to find those people and
have them feel supported when you're
talking about like the main event
tournaments and we can look at good Guri
in the overwatch or watch league for
example like she's her she thankfully is
super well supported but it is really
brutal to get to the point where you're
the only woman in a league like it's
it's a much more supportive environment
to get that experience first playing
with a bunch of women before you step
foot into the pressure cooker that is
the main event tournaments so I like to
say that there are there are
opportunities and places where having
some all women's spaces can be really
beneficial for the women who are there
they can share stories that they might
not feel comfortable sharing in front of
guys they can meet each other and
network and find other women who are
having the similar experiences and it
just it can be very bolstering and
encouraging for them to know that
they're not alone that they're not the
only ones who have had these experiences
and also to find other women who maybe
have great experiences at their company
or within write or whatever and be able
to touch them and be like hey here you
know this
this part of working at this company
kind of sucks but here's all the stuff
that's awesome so let me give you a more
sort of nuanced story about my personal
experience and being able to do that and
the women's only environment is a lot
easier do you think that there were
alternative paths for that event for
instance having like the main room open
the entire time to everybody but that
having a separate session in a different
room where women place that I think was
a lot of people's reaction was well I
want to go before 2:30 it sucks that I
can't go because of my gender it seems
like there there's an opportunity there
to have had that room available during
that time to everybody and then and then
create a separate space or something for
this type of thing there would have been
less I think that I think riots trying
to you know make a make a statement
right and try to sort of make up for and
some of the negative stuff that has
happened in the past and they they don't
want want it to seem like their effort
to support women is is on the sidelines
so I think that making you know their
main space dedicated to women was a
statement to the women and in the space
that like hey you're important and we
want you to be here and we're gonna
dedicate this space to you but you know
like ultimately I think in the future I
don't I don't know that they will feel
that they need to do this the same way
and may find other ways to I mean they
will they will absolutely find other
ways to support women but they probably
will continue to do some women only
stuff and and it really but I mean the
goal here is supporting the women so I
think the question is were the women
happy about it did they feel like it was
it was beneficial for them and that's
that's really what matters you know like
I'm sorry that that some people had
their feelings hurt it sucks to feel
excluded like it does it really does we
we all we all can say that that's that
that's the case it'll and all the women
in the game industry have experience
with that feeling so you know coming
from a place of compassion and empathy I
know that that can be shocking and I can
feel like you're having something taken
away but hopefully once you know the
initial sting of that fades a little bit
people will find the generosity to be
like hey if this is a special and
beneficial thing for them and like they
honestly said it was good for them then
then sure maybe maybe it's worth doing
and we can find something else to do
until 2:30 sure what what are the things
that I saw folks bringing up and I want
to ask you this just so that there's a
chance to address it a lot of people
said hey I I consider myself an ally I
want this stuff to be supported now I
find myself frustrated because of the
way that this was taken right so in a
sense I I see what you mean when you say
that it matters how the women feel about
it but is there any concern that there
are people who would normally be in
supportive initiatives like this or
people who find themselves you know like
they generally don't care now they're
they're frustrated you you perhaps
create a group of frustrated people who
who now are aligned to opposite of you
rather than somewhere in the middle or
even on your side I mean I I'm I'm not
really sure that there are too many
allies and self-identified allies out
there who are genuinely frustrated by
this like you might be disappointed at
first right but like if we if we refocus
what is important here which is that
we're trying to support the women who
are who are currently in the industry or
thinking about getting into the industry
we're supporting those women and trying
to find ways to to you know to support
them and encourage them that's what's
important I think that and most allies
if if that's refocused for them then
they will be like okay fine that that
that sounds like that would be a helpful
thing I I can't imagine that that
frustration will genuinely linger and
and I would caution people to to not get
too distracted by the sort of meta anger
you know there's like a lot of meta
chatter around this stuff which
distracts from the actual issue like
when we're getting mad about some of the
sort of back talk that was that was seen
on Twitter from
frustrated riot employees where they're
frustrated with the backlash that
they're seeing and so then they come out
and then they they they call people
idiots I don't remember exactly what the
terminology was but they they sort of
lashed out we have people lashing out of
each other that's a distraction like on
all sides this is a distraction from the
actual purpose an actual point of all of
this and you know so if you if you're an
ally and you you want to actually see
this equality ultimately then listening
to the women and what they actually say
is helpful is kind of the first step and
then asking how to be involved and maybe
that's the next step that riot should
take is maybe thinking about like how
can we actively sort of involve the the
guys in our community who want to be
part of the solution like how do you do
that and in there you know there are
Ally programs out there and other parts
of you know social advocacy and and in
certain parts of the gaming game
development where like Ally training is
a thing and Ally awareness and being
just being aware of like what if you
witness a woman being harassed or being
subject to some like gross language or
whatever like what should you do what
because it's that's that's not just hard
for the woman who's suffering from it
it's it's awkward for everybody who's
witnessing it and and people frequently
don't know what to do they're like I
don't I don't know dude should I like
confront that guy or should I like what
do I do and so you know giving people
the tools in inside the company to know
how to handle that would be really
helpful and I think helping the
community to be aware of those problems
and it would also be really helpful the
last question on this pax thing you kind
of referenced it with the back talk I
know you said not to be distracted by it
but it's hard not to bring it up given
the fact that it went on to then just
dominate so much the conversation there
was a very kind of aggressive reaction
from some of the riot folks or people
who were in support of this on Twitter
not everybody but some and I think a lot
of people you know one of the higher up
comments I saw and rather than read of
threats got a lot of hope votes was you
know I was in support of this
initiative and still em but I don't
appreciate that you know individuals are
casting one of them a system designers
at Riot Games was calling people
man-beasts it's sort of that idea that
instead of having the conversation
babies man babies yes sorry I ran babies
that I yeah this this sense of like hey
instead of having the conversation about
this
you just sort of blanket everyone the
same way or you you disregard anybody
who could see us a separate angle to
this well I mean so for that person if
he was in support of this then he wasn't
the target of that conference but I
don't think he was the man baby in
question but you know like let's again
let's put on our empathy hats here and
let's try to imagine the pressure that
the rioters have been under for the neck
for the last couple weeks since the
Kotaku thing came out and since
subsequent articles have come out
they're under the microscope and I'm
sure people are asking them constantly
about their experiences and what right
it's gonna do and so they're they feel
under a lot of pressure and on top of
that anytime the riot comes out and says
like okay we're gonna take these steps
there's a huge backlash where people are
like right it's not doing enough or the
fact that riot is doing this is stupid
and so they're just they're under
assault and have been under assault for
the last few weeks so if we're wearing
our empathy hats and trying to empathize
like they're dealing with a lot of
pressure and I think in in in particular
that one systems designer in question I
think is somebody who has talked about
these sort of toxic cultural patterns
before and experienced them and and has
seen them firsthand and has been
frustrated by them and so you know I
think that he reached a boiling point
which you know net blowing up on Twitter
rarely is a thing that that makes
anybody feel good at the end of the day
like it can cause more problems than
it's worth but I can't say that I blame
that reaction and you know like but
that's the reason why I call it a
distraction is because that person is is
reacting out of frustration and then
ever
reacting in a frustration and now we're
we're biting each other because we're
all frustrated about each other's tone
none of that matters
like let's if we're stepping back we
should step back as I can't say none of
that actually matters what actually
matters is how are we going to solve
this problem and what are we gonna do
like what solutions are we gonna try you
know what sometimes it's I think and
this is actually a thing that we do with
any key is we try to sort of frame all
of the initiatives that we that we try
as experiments because this problem has
not been solved yet so nobody knows what
the golden solution is gonna be or if
it's gonna be a special cocktail of of
initiatives and research and whatever
and awareness campaigns like we don't
know yet we're trying things out to see
what helps so in this case riot tried
something I hope that the women who
attended benefited and felt supported
and got something positive out of it and
then hopefully you know the right team
that organized it will learn something
and make something even better next time
and that that is ultimately what is I
think worth spending energy on rather
than the frustration that gets spouted
on both sides so I know you're running
low on time I've taken you for quite
some time but I want to just sort of at
the end put an end cap on this so riot
came out with their statement I've seen
and heard from friends and people online
sort of mixed reactions to it people who
really thought it was it was great
others who thought it was okay but maybe
like some teeth what was your reaction
to their statement um you know I the
thing I always get sort of caught up in
myself is imagining how these
conversations are unfolding behind
closed doors and I feel like the
statements that riot has made so far
really sort of like if you're aware of
the tensions that they're trying to
balance it sort of becomes obvious how
many parties they're trying to involve
in a very complex process so and and on
top of that like I also was listening to
a lot of the responses and heard
dissatisfaction of all kinds you know I
I would say that it's progress I I hope
to see that actually manifest in big
ways but again I I know that this
culture change takes a long time and it
has to come from the leadership so what
I think would maybe be helpful is if
some of the leaders personally took this
on and took responsibility for this
change because so far it seems like
we've seen a lot of like big statements
from riot as a company which sort of D
personalizes it and you know on one hand
it makes it so that the all the rioters
can can own it as part of their own sort
of project and as their own goal but it
would be nice I think to be able to
actually sort of associate some of the
leaders with in riot with this this
mission and and hey maybe that's the
chief diversity and inclusion officer
that they're gonna eventually hire but I
think it just it remains to be seen how
effective and dramatic this change is
gonna be and then the last question here
is just if they're on the outside are
you know after all this stuff has hit
I've seen a lot of people who in the
community who say you know for years now
I've wanted to work at riot and I I just
don't want to anymore like that dream
has gone for me or people who say like I
don't know if I want to keep playing
this game or supporting this or
following the eSport or anything do you
have any any thoughts for those people
who might be looking at their future in
association with the company with the
game and sort of the community and and
unsure of which direction to head so for
those who who sort of dreamed of working
for Riot I think it depends on what kind
of person you are and what you can
tolerate because I I think that this is
gonna be a really intense next year
probably for riot I mean I mean I know
that as they're trying to develop new
IPs like that already is sort of a
tumultuous
process and now they're having to
undergo a culture change so peanuts
there it's gonna be kind of a wild
chaotic place for the next year maybe
even two I don't know like it's hard to
say how long pieces will be falling into
place if you're the type of person who
is really gung-ho and wants to go in
there and sort of make your own future
and influence what the company turns
into then maybe this is a great
opportunity to be applying to write it
but if you're somebody who has already
dealt with work environments where
you've had to experience this kind of
baloney we can and sort of negative
situations I mean I think that it would
probably bring back memories that were
not productive
I mean I sometimes people come out of
these sort of environments with PTSD
like for real
and and I don't think that this is
probably the best environment for you
but I but again I you know a lot of the
stories that are coming out are you know
a year two to four years old
some of the women that I've talked to
who are currently there are very
determined and very optimistic about the
future of riot which gives me hope if
they if they have hope and they're there
every day then I have hoped to but again
I swear I look to the leadership if the
leadership is is bodying then I think
that the change that we're hoping to see
will actually have a chance of happening
but if we're not seeing the leadership
actually own it it's kind of relegated
to like oh our diversity and inclusion
team is going to do all this stuff for
us then that that is a little bit more
concerning so you know that's where we
all kind of have to wait and see and if
you're a fan of game I mean sure you're
a fan of the game you're a fan of the
game and I can't blame anybody if they
want to take a break from it for a while
if it like leaves a bad taste in their
mouth like that I I'm not going to try
to sugarcoat that for anybody but I
suspect that there are a lot of people
who will continue to play anyway and
just hope that right gets better yeah
they're good for it is there anything
that you would you would say to anybody
there any resources or anything that you
would like to to speak on just kind of
an open
or here for you at the end um sure well
so I any key is the organization that I
work for and you can find us on Twitter
at a 10 a key org and we do research and
we do initiatives and we are always
happy to you know consider research
angles like if people have questions
that they would like answered or they're
curious about you know certain aspects
of gaming culture both in communities
player communities and also game
industry like we're we're doing new
research projects all the time so we're
always happy to get ideas there and
that's always you know a good place to
engage it's about these kinds of topics
and if you have questions about like
basic stuff like I keep seeing this term
sis be tossed around I have no idea what
it means like can you give me context
you can you can tweet us at any kata org
very good well hey thank you so much for
taking the time to talk to me hopefully
there's a lot of people who found value
in our conversation and maybe they'll
follow up with you at any key org on
Twitter yep Thank You Travis